---
title: "Aubrey Beardsley: A Model For a Repressive Social Environment"
date: 2001-04-03
banner: beardsley_banner.jpg
thumbnail: beardsley_thumb.jpg
tags:
  - philosophy
  - art
  - beauty
  - ontology
---

As we venture forth into the twenty-first century, our popular culture continues
to cling to its repressive, Victorian heritage.  Aubrey Beardsley expressed and
contemplated ideas, which were otherwise inconvenient to be discussed in open
conversation.  He brought light to the dark recesses of the human psyche and
threw it in the faces of all who would take the risk of flipping through one of
his publications. I believe Beardsley to be an important figure in the history
of illustration and that his work deserves closer study to aid in the opening
of our minds to the macrocosm of experience, which is life.

In this paper I will explain how Beardsley’s Decadent world-view is an important
model for society’s repressive holdovers from previous centuries, and is an
important milestone in the public understanding of the human condition.

Aubrey Beardsley was an illustrator who lived towards the end of the nineteenth
century.  He differed from most artists in that he purposely molded his
techniques and work to better suit the mechanical reproduction machines used at
the time.  As a result, much of his work is simple and contains impoverished
(if not, no) colour.  He used line over tone, print over paint, and
reproduction over frame.  His work was meant to be seen by the masses, not only
those fortunate enough to afford a visit to the museum or gallery.  He became
so proficient with his techniques that he achieved the ability of producing
artwork, which could be photographed or printed, with the copy being so close
to the original that the differences were negligible.  He was considered to be
a “realist” (i.e., he looked at all of reality as it was, without censorship.)
He looked at “all the grit and rawness of life itself.”  (Wilson, p. 8)  But
more specifically, he was a “decadent”.  Instead of concentrating on the dirty,
impoverished, and oppressed images of the working class (which is what most
realists looked at to give their work a down-to-earth feel), Beardsley looked
at the upper class, but in a view which was of the other great, Victorian
repression:  sexuality (see attached copy of Beardsley’s Lysistrata.)  Also,
instead of showing the “filth” which is prevalent in reality, he attempted to
make his work as beautiful as possible.  In this mode, he was able to make
a “penetrating observation of his fellow human beings.”  (Wilson, p. 8)  Very
similar to Ukyo-e in both style and content, Beardsley unlocked the forbidden
door in the back of the human mind and opened it wide for the world to see.  He
wasn’t afraid to venture into this realm of imagery, and he helped bring us
back to our animal roots, not the “higher” beings we like to believe ourselves
to be in comparison to the rest of the life on this planet.

Today’s modern society is more open minded than that of Beardsley’s day, but
still, we censor our thoughts, hide ideas from developing minds, and disguise
the true essence of life under a cloak of political correctness.  It is the job
of the artist (illustrator) to continually remind the world of what it doesn’t
want to think about, to bring to the surface of consciousness the ideas which
are difficult and perplexing.  We still consider sexuality a taboo or sorts,
and avoid its possibilities as if we are ashamed of our own human nature.  For
example, we have a law against not wearing clothes.  Clothes are one of the
most artificial inventions which we Homo-sapiens seem to think is a required
accessory.  We are the only animals on this planet who cover ourselves and
disguise our true being.  Another example of our modern repressions can be seen
in our mass media.  Our television programs are cut and muted and altered to
the point where the original message that was to be conveyed is hopelessly
lost.  We frown upon the use of “profane” words.  What makes one set of
linguistic utterances and vocally generated air vibrations acceptable, and
others not acceptable?  Obviously it has to do with their meaning, but we can
convey the same meaning in an acceptable way or in an unacceptable way.  Why is
this?  If someone were to describe their sexual activities as “making love”,
this would be accepted by society, but if they described it as “fucking”,
society would feel the need to censor this speech.  We try to avoid such words
and gestures (e.g., the middle finger) but don’t realize the ridiculousness and
arbitrariness of our decisions (i.e., they are only air vibrations and
extensions of limbs!)  We are limiting our abilities of expression, and for no
good reason.  Illustrators, and artists in general, must ignore social
conventions and allow the wholeness of the human condition to be expressed. How
else are we to learn and understand our seemingly meaningless situation, here,
on this speck of dust, floating among the stars, if not by examining all the
facts and possibilities?

The individual artist should determine what is worthy of his skills, not
society, which inhibits thoughts regarding the possibilities of life simply
because it does not understand them fully.  We seem to be afraid of that which
we do not know or understand.  But how are we ever going to comprehend this
unknown if we do not dare to even think about it?  Beardsley was not afraid,
and allowed his mind to roam free wherever it desired.  Through such actions,
the essence of that which is human is allowed to reach fresh air and present
itself to the world for consideration and examination.  Illustrators should not
be inhibited and should show the rest of humanity what it is that they are
missing.  Life is fun and playful, and shouldn’t be halted as a result of
misunderstanding.  We should view Beardsley as a role model of self expression.
He understood what he wanted, knew how to get it, and wasn’t afraid of
exploring his mind to see what possibilities he might have been overlooking.
The novel possibilities of experience are what we all live for.

Aubrey Beardsley is important to illustration, because he demonstrated a method
of thought which is uninhibited and he was not afraid to share it with the
masses through the technology of print.  Our society is repressed and afraid of
the unknown, but Beardsley’s work can help us see through the curtains we have
pulled over the fringes of life that we find troublesome to consider.


References
----------

- **Elliot, Bridget**. *Aubrey Beardsley: Sixty Selected Drawings*. Academy Group Ltd., London. 1995.
- **Wilson, Simon**. *Beardsley*. Phaidon Press, Oxford.  1983.
