---
title: Mathematics, 3D puzzles, and Logical Interpretations
date: 1999-04-07
banner: shale_trail_banner.jpg
thumbnail: shale_trail_thumb.jpg
tags:
  - philosophy
  - epistemology
  - metaphysics
---

In his paper, "The Pragmatic Element in Knowledge," C.I. Lewis makes the claim
that knowledge is necessarily dependent upon the uses that we intend for it,
that "there is a pragmatic element in knowledge" (245). So, essentially, there
is no meaning for abstract terms until they are pragmatically related to
reality. Lewis' theory asserts that this relation is by means of interpretation
and that such an interpretation inevitably conforms to our needs and interests.
In this paper I intend to show that Lewis' view is valid by first describing
his position and then by offering further support with my own examples.

Lewis' paper begins by stating aspects of knowledge which are necessary for an
understanding of reality. He says that "there are three elements in knowledge:
the given or immediate data of sense, the concept, and the act which interprets
the one by means of the other" (234). He uses "the given" as a label for actual
experience of the world around us, the qualia we gain from it, and what it is
like for the subjective individual to exist there. With respect to sense data,
there subsist individual differences such that where I might see the colour
red, you, as a result of slightly different chemical makeup in your eye, might
see, what I would consider, the colour blue. This is an extreme example of the
kind of subjectivity which we all experience simply because we are not the
equivalent people/minds. Next, Lewis specifies, what he calls, "the concept,"
or pure logic. This aspect of knowledge is such that it can be deduced and
verified without any need of connection to the real world. It exists in
abstracto as he puts it. An example of this is pure mathematics. Lewis
demonstrates in his paper how, with only a few, basic assumptions, anyone with
a logical mind can deduce complex mathematics from a limited starting point. In
its pure form, it has no association to the world and is but a set of logical
patterns which follow regardless of any values we substitute for its X's and
Y's. "Thus we discover that the content of pure mathematics is simply the
deductive or logical order of purely logical entities, a sort of elaborate
logical pattern of abstract terms without any denotation at all" (236). Lewis
also points out that "...mathematical truth is a little more certain than
almost any other kind of knowledge that we have" (237). He then remarks that we
do not require any additional experience to verify it, because its entirety
follows logically from its primitive principles (e.g., Euclid's geometry leads
to complex linear algebra); it is a priori. The last and most important element
of knowledge, in Lewis' opinion, is the pragmatic interpretation of the given
by use of the concept in order to arrive at an understanding of the world. He
says that this interpretations is the grounding of our logical truths in the
real world; defining the variables and making them mean something in reality.

Lewis states that our purely logical truths are the elements of
knowledge "...which two minds must have in common" (238). That is, only logical
elements may be communicated and shared between two people while still being
understood in an equivalent fashion by them both. For example, take the case of
the two people who behold different colours for the identical physical
phenomenon. Where one experiences what I would label red, the other perceives
what I would label blue, yet both identify the colour as "red". In this manner,
sense experience is subjective and different for each individual mind. No one
can know how "true" red appears (because it doesn't exist; colour exists only
as an interpretation of light waves), but only what his individual visual
apparatus allows him to perceive. And so two minds cannot share the same
understanding with each other with respect to the given. But the concept can be
understood in the same way by two minds. Even though one sees blue and the
other red, on the abstract level of pure logic, both can speak of things "red"
without reference to the material qualia of the experience each of them
receives from the world. The word "red" is here used as a label or variable not
referring to any specific quality of the visual spectrum. We cause the word to
mean something when we assign it the value of that individually, subjective
colour in the world which arises from longer wavelengths of light. Thus both
people will stop their cars at a "red" light (but not necessarily a red
light ;), even though they are seeing very deviant qualities of colour, and
both can operate and move about in the world discussing "red" things as if this
qualia were the same for both of them. This is the distinction that Lewis makes
in his paper; that pure logic can be considered independent of real world
experience.

The term "red" is comparable to a variable X in mathematics. It can be talked
about (e.g., X > Y) and used in more complex deductions (e.g., X + Y + Y = X +
2Y). These logical relations are equivalent for both the people described
above. But it is the individual's qualia that supplies the values for these
terms, so that while person A might "see" X = 2 and person B "sees" X = 3, the
logical relations are still valid for both interpretations. The concept is, so,
crucial to the sharing and advancing of knowledge.

The interpretations is what makes the abstract concepts relevant and practical
to the current reality, whereas without any interpretation, the concept is
merely a sort of parameter set, awaiting sense data to fill its slots and
provide it with meaning. "Order, or logical pattern, is the essence of
understanding. Knowledge arises when some conceptual pattern of relationships
is imposed upon the given by the interpretation" (240). So the difference
between the concept and the interpretation is similar to the difference between
pure mathematics and applied mathematics; one is abstract and pragmatically
meaningless whereas the other is grounded in the real world and thus embodies
practical significance.

Lewis then goes on to explain how we are constantly reviewing and expanding our
domain of knowledge through scientific, mathematical, and logical discovery. We
are always appending to the complex set of logical relations which we posses
and thereby expanding the realm of experience within which we may converse to
one another. For example we may talk about black holes and quasars today,
whereas in Plato's time such concepts were not yet deduced and thus outside the
conversable domain of truth. Lewis expresses that sometimes we discover
different explanations for the same thing, but that the "truer" one is the
theory which explains the most in the simplest terms and which is useful to the
current state of reality. Lewis gives the example of Ptolemyan astronomy versus
Copernican astronomy (the heavens move around a stationary earth or the earth
moves around the sun and the sun throughout the heavens). The Copernican view
was adopted because it made the relative motion of the earth easier to
understand and allowed for further astronomical explanations to be developed
where they could not have been within the more complex, difficult, and thus
less pragmatic, former theory. Hence we adopt the explanation or truth which is
more practical and relevant to our given experience. Therefore, interpretation
is pragmatic.

But, one might say, interpretation is not needed for knowledge. The concept and
the given lead directly to knowledge because they are linked together forming a
single set of truths and are inseparable, contrary to what Lewis maintains in
his paper. The concept depends on a few simple definitions from which the rest
of the abstract is constructed. These simple definitions are "given" from
experience and thus the concept is but an extension of the given. No
further "interpretation" is then needed because what is known is simply what
one has experienced directly. Any "deductions" of logic do not constitute
knowledge but mere theories or hypotheses. On might predict that a mass X
falling in the Earth's atmosphere will eventually impact the ground because of
gravitic forces Y acting upon the mass and velocity Z with which the mass is
moving. This does not mean that you know that such a mass will impact the
ground, but only that you are highly certain that it might happen based on past
and similar occurrences of falling masses. When you throw a ball into the air
and it plummets back to the Earth and strikes the ground, you now know only
that this specific ball thrown at such and such an angle at such and such a
velocity at such and such a time in the Earth's rotation around the sun will
return to the Earth at such and such a point on the ground. So abstract
concepts are only verifiable through given experiences at which point they are
no longer abstract, but specific concepts. Therefore the only true knowledge is
that which is experienced in the given verifying only very specific concepts of
inductive logic.

This objection to Lewis's theory is fallacious because the idea of the concept
is based on those explanations which do not depend on reality to take their
form. They can be thought of independently of initial definitions
(given experiences), but once these definitions are made, naturally it is
grounded and made practical for use in reality. For example we can think of the
concept "A + B = A & B". It does not matter what A or B are, the concept is
still true. The initial definitions do not matter, but certain definitions are
chosen only for practical reasons.

The making of definitions for substitutions of abstract variables is the act of
interpretation. The given without logical interpretation is, alone, a "buzzing,
blooming confusion" (240) of sensations. Order and understanding are placed
upon these sensations by means of logical interpretation. Take computer
generated 3D paintings for instance (see for example, the works posted at
www.vision3d.com as of 1999). Gazing into one of these images at first gives
one the impression of disordered and chaotic colours splashed upon the canvas.
But by peering closely and allowing one's cognitive faculties to interpret what
is being presented by visual perception, 3D images appear to "pop out" of the
chaos. The person who looks at the painting but does not see the 3D image still
perceives the same seeming random array of colours (the same
information/sensation) as the person who does see the 3D image, but only one of
them has knowledge of the painting. In this way, you can see how the concept
and the given are separate sets of truths and that logical interpretation is
needed to arrive at knowledge.

Therefore, Lewis's theory, that there is a pragmatic element in knowledge, is
valid. Logical truths can be understood in purely abstract terms and verified
thus without any reference to reality. Given, sense data from the world around
us is but a "buzzing, blooming confusion" when passively receiving it. Only
with logical interpretation can this confusion be alleviated providing order
and understanding, leading to knowledge. Interpretations change over time,
changing as the need for better interpretations arise so that we may still use
similar words or variables, but the meanings of these labels changes. Where at
one point "life" meant "what has a soul", it has now been revised to mean "what
can reproduce, adapt, grow, etc." The meaning of the word has been altered "by
the degree to which our most vital needs and interests are satisfied" (243). So
the interpretations we use are pragmatic in nature, used only to meet out needs
and interests. Consequently, there is a pragmatic element in knowledge.

Works Cited
-----------

Lewis, C.I., "The Pragmatic Element in Knowledge" in Knowledge:
Classical and Contemporary Approaches. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
234-245.
