---
title: Is There Something Other Than Time Tracking?
date: 2012-01-25
banner: ebike_charger_banner.jpg
thumbnail: ebike_charger_thumb.jpg
tags:
  - process
  - business
  - organizing
---

When operating a business, many owners want to track the time component of their
production processes. This makes sense, as it informs future estimates for
following similar processes, and it helps get a general sense of modules in the
processes which may or may not being operating at maximum capacity (e.g., this
might be employees working hard or being lazy, or it might be an algorithm
which is efficient or inefficient).

I think the ultimate goal, when dealing with time and how it relates to your
business's production capacity (and your ability to talk intelligently about
what's actually happening), is to simply be able to identify potential
bottle-necks, and in being able to understand what a bottle-neck looks like and
why it's holding things up, you will also have needed to really understand how
to the whole process is working, and thus be able to better appraise and
minimize future risk.

Could this be done better (i.e., is there a way we can save money on production
costs to increase our profit without charging more)?

In answering this question, you must identify all dependencies for which the
process in question relates. You'll need to identify the unique parts, measure
their performance, compare their performance to some sort of standard, and
judge if its performance capacity is adequately meeting your goals for the
company.


Unique Parts
------------

- workers
- machines
- communication
- clients
- data organization
- techniques


Performance Measurement
-----------------------

Some degree of measurement. Traditionally, this would be the amount of time
something takes to execute, thus time-tracking is a regular practice in many
businesses. But what other ways can performance be measured at this granular
level? We can't say something like "return on investment" because *that* is
measured as a function of cost versus revenue, and cost time is a factor of
cost. I'm trying to imagine if there are other low-level metrics like time that
could be thought of that might put us in a different (and hopefully more
informed) state of mind in evaluating a component's performance.


Comparisons
-----------

How do other businesses' processes compare to our process? Can we identify any
points that we could improve in our own processes? Do these improvements
satisfy our goals? For example, if a process can be improved by employing slave
labor, you still need to determine if that's an acceptable method for you
ethically, which may require you using a less-optimal, but pro-ethical method
instead, that, then, being the most optimal process (given ethical
constraints).


Evaluation
----------

If existing processes are more or less on par with competitors (or better), then
perhaps time could be better spent looking for different areas of the business
to work on and improve, like marketing or deciding to develop open-source
projects, or making the tough call to terminate an employment. Obviously, if
something is starring me in the face, I'll fix it, but there are many other
parts of running a business which are important too, which aren't production
performance optimization. If current performance is within tolerance of the
competition, that's not bad, maybe there's other stuff I should be worrying
about.


Conclusion
----------

So. How can we achieve the ability to inform ourselves in this way and be in a
position to make decisions based on production performance in a way that is
least disruptive to the people that are parts of these processes? That is, if I
can spend less time tracking my time, I can spend more time making stuff to
sell (which would ideally bring more profit to the company). How else can we
determine if something's working or not?

