---
title: Movie Usability
date: 2008-11-12
banner: tunnel_banner.jpg
thumbnail: tunnel_thumb.jpg
tags:
  - ux
  - products
  - business
---

Watching  movies is great, but the rest of the experience around purchasing a
movie for home viewing leaves me wanting.

I love movies. They're experience in a can. I can go on adventures, fall in
love, conquer over evil, laugh, cry, or speculate on realities different from
my own. I can always find a movie that provides me with a mood or feeling
on-demand. From Hitchcock to Tromaville, I appreciate the detailed
craftsmanship and artistry that goes into every one of them. Suffice it to say
I spend a lot of money buying movies so I can watch them at home. I love my
mini theatre in my living room that immerses me in the emotions of the films to
which I have access (though I'm not sure about 3D yet).

The following is a list of expectations I feel are deserved of paying a premium
price to experience a movie, along with a rough comparison of DVDs, Torrents,
and Netflix regarding how well they support each expectation. Unfortunately
none of these distribution channels is completely satisfactory. I'm willing to
pay a premium price to have all my expectations met and in so doing, nurture
the motion picture ecosystem. I think there is room for a new category of movie
products to be developed which could simultaneously meet the expectations of
movie watchers like me, as well as those of the people who make them.


Control & Usability
-------------------

I don't like waiting for FBI warnings, previews, or ads (I think I should at
least be able to skip them). Nothing frustrates me more than not being able to
actually use the product I just bought. I just spent a lot of money for
something and I want to be able to actually use it. If I hit fast-forward,
play, stop, or pause, I have expectations about what should happen. It's like
one of those hard-sell pressure schemes: you know, like those "deals" where if
you listen to someone sell you on a time-share in Florida they'll give you a
free ticket to Disney World? But with DVDs you already bought the ticket
yourself, and you still have to listen to the sales-pitch.

**DVD**: no, **Torrent**: yes, **Netflix**: yes


Instant On
----------

With physical pieces of plastic (after I've travelled to and from the store to
acquire them), I have to take them out of their case (while always failing to
remove the security tape without damaging the beautiful covers), insert them
into my player, turn my machine on, and load what's on the discs into the
machine's memory. With digital files I can just press a button from my couch to
both acquire and start playing my selected movie. For a lazy software developer
like me, buttons win over walking, any day; especially if I'm paying for it.

**DVD**: no, **Torrent**: yes, **Netflix**: yes


Previews
--------

I want to kick the tires and take my potential purchases for a spin before I lay
down serious money. I'm even ok with spending a small fee to rent a one-time
use of the experience like seeing the movie in a theatre or streaming it. But I
need to be able to see what it is that I'm buying before I buy it. What else do
I have to go on? Blind faith? Older movies, no longer in theatres, and not
available to stream, are a little bit difficult to make decisions about.
Currently, only "illegal" downloads offer a solution. I fully admit I download
off torrent sites for this very reason. But when I find awesome content that I
love I usually go out and buy it too. There's simply no way to know what I'm
getting in a lot of cases. So I think being able to preview a movie as part of
the purchasing process really needs to be taken seriously.

**DVD**: no, **Torrent**: yes, **Netflix**: partial


Available on Release
--------------------

When a movie is released in theatres it should also be released in a form I can
buy (or at least soon after). I understand that studios want to maximize
theatre sales. But the days of the theatre are ending and home theatre sales
are increasing all the time. Maybe the theatre should be more of an ultimate
preview to help make the decision to spend money on the *real* thing. Go ahead
and make the as-released price higher than the price when the movie is no
longer in theatres. At least I can get what I want when I want it (and I'd
probably be willing to pay for it rather than waitâ€¦ if the movie's any good).

**DVD**: no, **Torrent**: yes, **Netflix**: no


Variety & Budget
----------------

I only have so much money. I'm not poor, but I'm not rich either. I always hit
my limit of maximum movie purchases per month. After that there are no more
sales anyone can get out of me. If I download a movie, that's not a lost sale.
That's just additional marketing exposure for my future purchases (i.e., an
increase in sales potential). Studios, don't try to convince me that I'm a
criminal when I'm actually helping you do your job. To this end, I think an
appropriate solution is to make variety available in a way that suits the
average movie lover's budget. Maybe that means charging a little bit less than
$100 for a box set. I know my market can't bare that kind of pricing. Obviously
I'm already spending my limit, but if an alternative distribution channel opens
up that offers greater variety to me than currently available, *that* offering
is going to get my money.

**DVD**: no, **Torrent**: yes, **Netflix**: partial


Backups & Compatibility
-----------------------

My Bluray discs only work in approved Bluray players. What happens when there
are no more Bluray players or the one I have breaks? What if my house burns
down? Do the hundreds of dollars I've sunk into those movies evaporate? Do I
need to buy the same thing twice (in whatever new format is out there)? I want
to be able to back that shit up! A movie constitutes the type of product that
has no canonical, physical, form. The essence of the movie isn't its storage
medium, and in this way it is a different kind of thing than a chair or a bed.
It's possible (and easy) to duplicate a movie and store it in multiple media,
in different physical locations, safeguarding it against catastrophe. It's also
possible to transform the movie from one storage format to another without a
loss of its essence. My thinking is that when I spend hard-earned money on a
movie, I buy the right to access its essence in my home whenever I feel like
it. If that means 50 years from now in some new-fangled-holo-whatsit-format
downloaded from my personal cloud server, I should be able to do that. All
current "legitimate" movie formats prevent backups by design.

**DVD**: no, **Torrent**: yes, **Netflix**: no


Support Creators
----------------

I want my money to support the people who make these great works of art. That's
the main reason I buy this stuff. I want more great movies to be made. And that
means the people who make movies need to eat and be motivated to make the
effort. My friends are all creators (as I am myself) and I want them all to
continue adding new and interesting things to our culture so we can all enjoy
them. The creators make the stuff that matters. But I don't think distribution
companies, lawyers, or studios necessarily make what matters (they help get
what matters out there for everyone to see, but they don't directly *make* the
goods). I would like to see more money go to the creators, and less to the
middlemen. And in the age of open networks, I see less need for middlemen, and
more potential rewards for creators and innovators. Maybe the future of movies
is more of a mini-startup a la Kickstarter where investors get a copy for
themselves, creators get funded for projects people are actually interested in,
and the profits feed creativity directly. Current distribution systems seem
like they could do better.

While I recognize that creators are not being directly compensated by torrent
downloads, I do believe it is supporting creators by adding a lot of marketing
value (which will indirectly compensate through increased exposure).

**DVD**: partial, **Torrent**: partial, **Netflix**: partial

---

New services like Netflix are a step in the right direction (if only the
Canadian version actually had a selection to choose from), and I happily spend
my money on a subscription to wet my "rental" appetite. It more than replaces
what I sought from cable television (a moment of history I pretend didn't
happen). This has had an affect on what I would have downloaded through torrent
sites because their service effectively does many of the things a download
would otherwise do for me but better. However, there is still a real lack of
options for making purchases; to own a movie like I do a DVD.

Netflix excels at giving me on-demand access to many videos I want with just a
few button presses, allowing me to enjoy a rental and preview future potential
purchases. It is an example of a business strategy for making money through
leveraging the power of the internet rather than fighting it. One of the things
I love most about Netflix is that it introduces me to new content from other
parts of the world I might not otherwise have had any access to, or been aware
of. I don't know how the artists that made that content get compensated from
this, but it's at least using what the internet is good at to commercial
advantage and I applaud it.

But I still want to watch videos offline, on multiple devices, access any movie
I want, play/stop/fast-forward as I like, and I don't want to pay a monthly fee
to access movies I've already watched (this is a difference between buying
versus renting, so this may be a moot point because Netflix isn't really
purporting to be an "owning" service). DVDs aren't the answer, app-stores
aren't the answer, and neither are streaming services. I suspect the answer to
my problem is closely tied to the legalities of copyright itself (a system I
personally feel is currently not in balance with technological reality) and
that until it is reformed, we won't have alternative products available that
satisfy the expectations of both creators and their audiences.

