---
title: Lost in a Multitude of Possible Experiences
subtitle: Lost in Translation is one of my favourite movies, and I think this is why...
date: 2004-02-22
banner: crisscross_banner.jpg
thumbnail: crisscross_thumb.jpg
tags:
  - reviews
  - movies
  - consciousness
  - beauty
---

I'd like to talk a little bit about "Lost in Translation." I really liked it
when I first saw it, and now recently--watching it a few more times on
DVD--I've discovered that I more than like it: I place it as one of my
favorite movies. But, I don't think it is because of the screen-play per se,
but because of the multitude of possible experiences that the viewer is able to
grasp from its Being.

I can watch and interpret different underlying meanings from what was presented
to me on the screen.  The first and probably most obvious interpretation is
that of the man who contemplates an affair, far away from home, lonely and
detached from his society.   I could also look at Bob as not even interested in
Charlotte as more than a good friend.  But, then I could also look at it a
different way still (the way I like to understand it).  Perhaps he is simply a
real human, Being through life, understanding the possible choices and simply
going with the flow:  he knows he *is* lonely and he's willing to go out
partying because what else is he going to do by himself in a foreign land?

I think it's safe to say that Bob realizes his feelings are changing when he
decides to stay for the "Carson" show (he  realizes that he's interested in
this girl as more than just a friend--this isn't to say that "more than a
friend" should  necessarily be romantic, but his relationship with her has
grown past the point of simply feeling happy:  he wants to *be*  together). He
kept their relationship Platonic. Did he realize  his true(romantic) feelings
for his wife and family and that that  is more important than the lusts of the
moment?  He says in the  middle how "the older you get, and the more you
understand yourself, the less you let things bother you." So, is he simply
understanding that he is a lonely male, next to an attractive and interest(ed)
(ing) female and that his feelings of attraction are normal; that he doesn't
need to get further romantically involved with this girl because he already
has a romantic life, and that there are other/different kinds of possible
relationships between two human beings?

Charlotte, obviously feeling alone and separated from her husband while he is
away on photo-shoots, seems to be attracted to Bob for his strange, self-calm
being.  He's just living life, stopping to smell the roses, and is
understanding of the overwhelming solipsistic struggle of conscious existence.
He was there when she needed him, you know?

This film exemplifies an encounter of two people who live (be) with Each other,
for real (as in not fake:  they let all their guards down and were
true/real/honest with each other).  They shared moments of artistic experience
like the honesty that comes from the artist because he puts his true feelings
into the expression of his painting, communicating to the viewer his real human
essence.  For lack of a better way of putting it, their minds came together in
a shared love of Being.  I love this idea because it seems that's just how
simple and wonderful actual life is.  I just need to love my Being.  If I want
to be happier, then I should love being happy.  If I think my morning commute
is dull and boring, then I should make it more exciting by skipping along the
sidewalk, smiling, and greeting strangers on the street.  Why not?  If I want
to love another, to end my loneliness, to Be together, I can.  These are the
sorts of feelings that the examples in the movie bring to my attention.

I like the movie mostly because, although there is a clear  message/theme that
speaks through, there is also enough left  unsaid (a healthy subtext) which can
be experienced in more  imaginative subtleties.  I enjoyed filling-in the
thoughts of the  characters as they gave silly looks and grimaces to the
Japanese  and to each other.  There was room to let the movie grow into *my*
life and *my* Being.  That is, by filling-in the character's  thoughts with my
own voice and memories and experiences, I was  able to feel more a part of the
their emotional struggles.  The  movie, in this sense, shared with me the same
way the two  characters were sharing with each other.  It was personal.  It was
real.  It was beautiful.
