---
title: The Creative Process in Software Development
date: 2017-01-05
banner: pond_banner.jpg
thumbnail: pond_thumb.jpg
tags:
  - tech
  - innovation
  - process
---

When creating an interactive software application there are many aspects of the
goal in its creation which are important in order to be successful. Success, in
this respect, means "app does X function with the least amount of effort
required from its user". And in this sense "least amount of effort" could be
broken down to include "aesthetically pleasing" since using something that
makes you happy is less effort than using something which makes you feel
awkward; that is, you just use it without thinking about it.

But there seems to be a general impression in software development(especially in
web development) that "design comes first, development comes after the design
has been approved", and I feel that this kind of thinking hampers productivity,
creativity, usability, and consequently profitability (for both clients and
contractors).

In my experience it has been much more effective to gradually and continually
work on all aspects of the goal for the app from the ground up and to make
decisions (in conjunction with clients) as progress is made, making pivots and
adjustments to the goal much more organic and less disruptive to the project
team as a whole.

I think the main problem stems from the nature of software itself: in each case,
designers and developers are creating something that has never been made
before. There are no existing guidelines on how to make "an X app" because it
hasn't been made before (and if it has been made before, why are we
re-inventing the wheel?) As such, there is a necessary process of exploration
and discovery, not just of the client's expectations, but of the app itself.
What is an x-app? What should it do? How should it behave? What makes it easy
to use? How do we even make it do X? What should it be called? Why is X
important? Does anyone care about X; especially enough to pay for it? I don't
think any final design can be contemplated without answering all these sorts of
questions, and many of these questions cannot be answered without first
exploring how the app actually does what it does. That is, it needs to be
built, at least partially, before you can even know what it is you're dealing
with and only *then* could you possibly define an effective visual language for
expressing its functions in shapes and colors and words and sounds. Development
needs to happen along-side design and one can't discover all it needs to know
without the other.

As an example, I couldn't make the title for this piece of writing without first
actually writing a draft because I didn't know, at the beginning, what it was I
was going to talk about. If I had started with the title, it might have been
called "Why I Hate Designers" but that's not what its about at all: out of a
design *frustration* I had something to say about the process we all use in
creating things and how different creators work together to create a bigger
whole. It had nothing to do with designers per se, nor any kind of personal
feelings. I needed to discover my thoughts only from a very vague and cloudy
notion which inspired to start of a journey. Project, in general, are like
this: they can't be defined up front; the creative process is a journey; and
only after having travelled along a path can a creator know whether that path
leads to her goal (or if her goal is even the direction she wants to walk in
the first place).

It's the old parallel versus serial thing. Does it scale? I don't know. Maybe
the way to do it is to create a small (10 or less person) team tasked with
exploration and prototype creation, to push the app as far as possible with
limited resources leaving all tasks related to scale for later. Then, once the
app is well understood, both in terms of communication and code, the team can
be increased and scaled up to handle more straightforward, but time-consuming,
scaling problems. Teams bigger than 10 people, from my experience at least,
don't seem to speed up creation time; and in fact more likely hamper it.

So what does this look like?

Well, for example, maybe when creating a web app/site, instead of creating
a "clickable mockup" in a proprietary program from Adobe (or whoever), why not
make an actual website with real, clickable, links? This initial site can
necessarily be very simplified, and in fact should cut all the corners
necessary to focus mainly on "get something working". Then, as the project
developers further changes can be made directly to this initial prototype which
can hopefully eventually evolve into the final product itself. Regardless, the
things learned in doing some simple coding with some simple design in an
excercise of making a "good enough" prototype that the client will understand
will uncover huge amounts of necessary information for informing the best
practices that will create the best end-goal.

Developers will discover things like "wow, I didn't expect this data
visualization graph to be this hard" and designers will discover things
like "omg, when you actually click on this link the screen change is very
sudden; we should maybe animate a fade-in or something so it's not as jarring".
Through this natural process of discovery and iteration the project can
eventually be considered "good enough" to show stake holders and engage in a
conversation about goals and expectations which can further inform the
iterations that follow. In this way, all parties are informed of the project's
overall state, its progress, its expectations, and everyone can plan ahead for
how to solve the currently known problems. Everyone is also actually talking to
each other in order to pull this off, so cross-diciplinary problems are fleshed
out earlier and last-minute delays can be avoided. There is also a change of
focus from "what it looks like" to "how it works" or "how it feels" which is
better for an *interactive* design and is different from a static print
design.

When a painter creates a painting, she might make some initial sketches, maybe
some quick gestures and color tests, but most of the work is done on the
actual, final, canvas. She might make a loose drawing first, then refine the
lines, then apply some dabs of paint and in the process discover how the form
interacts with the color and creates an overall composition. And then there is
a long and iterative process of refining and touching up and tweaking and maybe
even painting-over and redoing until finally, when stepping back from it all,
the painter decides that no more can be done that would make it any better, in
which case it is considered "done".

Software isn't exactly the same and is never, really, considered "done". But
there is a time during initial creation that the app could be considered "done
enough" to be put in front of the public and deliver enough value that it
should shared. Up until this point, each aspect of the app should be worked on
in conjunction with other aspects because it is the *whole* that is important
and this can only be seen, and judged, with all the aspects together beside
each other. This is why, I believe, an app should, as quickly as possible, and
as loosely as necessary for speed, be made as a prototype first(with everything
that involves from visual design to code development to deployment on a real
server with a real domain name) and then step back, consider it against the
goal, and then go back in and iterate on what needs improvements (some changes
cross-affecting other aspects which cascade and need to be considered
together). The whole is then built up gradually and in parallel and at any
point during the creation process, the client can look at a full working piece
of software.

As an individual, a creator likely works on everything all at once all the time
until the creation is done. As a team, the same sort of thing is going on for
each member of the team, only each member also connects with other members from
time to time, in the middle, and exchanges some information and/or
connectivity (imagine an individual creating a single jigsaw puzzle piece which
is put on the table and connected to other individuals' puzzle pieces to
contribute in creating the whole). Now, in reality, work is not so clearly
defined as a puzzle piece and overlaps with other people's work too. It is like
the way we descibe atoms with neutrons/protones and orbiting electrons when in
fact they are less like planets and more like blurry overlapping waves of
probabilities. But that's hard to picture in our limited human brains; but keep
it in mind and don't treat the analogy too literally ;)
